---
title: "2023 Annual Letter"
date: 2023-12-28
layout: post
description:
categories: self-reflection career
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: true
tags:
  - career
  - self-reflection
  - personal
---

Starting a tradition of writing an annual letter has been on my mind for quite some time, and this year it feels especially important as I’m at a pivotal juncture in my life. Previously, my years were predictable with school activities, research, attending conferences, etc. But this year is different: I’m finishing my PhD yet facing uncertainty in what comes next professionally. It’s a time for me to look ahead, stay open to opportunities, and navigate this new phase.

This past year was significant for me as I began to identify with a career in data science, a field I can see myself thriving in. However, the current economic climate is challenging, and the job market for data professionals is saturated. With elevated interest rates, companies are cutting back, and *experienced* data professionals are now looking for fewer available jobs. How can a recent PhD graduate break into the field?

2023 wasn’t just about these challenges, though; it brought its own set of opportunities. In November, I realized that I had developed a niche expertise in multielectrode array analyses for in vitro disease models. This realization, while specific and not relevant to 99.9% of people and companies, was a moment of personal pride that I am still savouring. That same month, this fact was further affirmed at the Society for Neuroscience annual meeting in Washington, DC, where I connected with many researchers over my enthusiasm, curiosity, and deep knowledge of the field. That was some high praise for someone who, when looking back at high school and early undergrad, could hardly remember talking unless called upon.

Then, in December, after marinating in these small wins, I became motivated to try to make something of my unique set of skills, and this is what I think the rest of my annual letter will be about.

### The future of medicine
Hippocrates once said (if the records are correct), “It is far more important to know what person the disease has than what disease the person has.” These words have never rung truer. Personalized stem cell models are reshaping the landscape of precision medicine. Imagine a world where medicine is as unique as a fingerprint – that’s where I believe we’re ultimately heading. These models, tailor-made from an individual’s own cells, unravel the unique interplay between one’s genetic blueprint and disease manifestation. By differentiating induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) into disease-specific cell types, we can witness the re-enactment of disease states within the distinct biological theatre of each person. It’s not just about identifying a disease anymore; it’s about understanding the patient as close to their entirety – right now, their genetic narrative. This means customizing treatments to the patient’s specific cellular and genetic predispositions, shifting from a one-size-fits-all approach to a targeted, personalized strategy.

Stem cell-based models, particularly when combined with in vitro multielectrode arrays (MEAs), offer unique advantages for studying neurological conditions that traditional methods cannot match. As stated above, the personalization of iPSCs is crucial in understanding the diverse ways neurological conditions can manifest in different individuals. When these iPSCs are differentiated into neuronal monolayers or three-dimensional organoid *mini-brains* and placed on MEAs, the setup provides an unparalleled platform for observing the functional characteristics of neuronal networks in real time. MEAs record the electrical activity of neurons, offering insight into the circuit-level mechanisms underlying neurological disorders, and facilitating how neurons communicate and respond to treatments, leading to more accurate drug screening and development. The non-invasive nature of MEAs allow for longitudinal studies on the same cell populations, providing valuable data on disease progression and treatment efficacy over time. The synergy between MEAs and stem cell-based models represents a significant leap in neurological research, no longer hampered by opaque and low-resolution methods, and enabling a more profound and personalized understanding of brain disorders. Stacking multiplexed functional genomics would take the entire field to a whole other level.

### So, what does a PhD do when they are trying to break into a field?

Start a contract research organization, of course. A contract research organization (CRO) is a company that aids other biotechnology companies by providing outsourced research services. For example, if one lab has identified a pharmaceutical treatment that works in their rodent model, they can contact a CRO that specializes in human cell-based models using various biological assays to assess the treatment efficacy. By partnering together, the founding lab does not need to acquire the expertise and equipment themselves and can still, in a cost-effective manner, continue their research. CROs are complex entities that have some limitations in their impact and require partnerships; however, are a way that any researcher working on the cutting edge can possibly pivot after academia.

Whether I pursue a CRO now or a bit down the line is still uncertain. Frankly, right now, I would like some career stability after over a decade-long marathon in formal education. But if a fascinating data job doesn’t come along, I’m certainly not going to sit on my hands waiting. 

In a matter of months, life can look like nothing you ever predicted.

until next year,\
Kartik Seyon Pradeepan
