---
title: 'Do not conflate how something happens for why something occurs'
date: 2023-10-06
tags:
  - philosophy
  - health
  - healthcare
  - research
---

> "The conceptual problem at the center of contemporary healthcare is the confusion between disease processes and disease origins. Instead of asking why an illness occurs and trying to remove the conditions that led to it, medical researchers try to understand the mechanism through which the disease operates, so that they can then interfere with them. These mechanisms, rather than the true origins, are seen as the causes of disease in current medical thinking. When modern medicine often loses sight of the human being, and reduces health to mechanical functioning, it is no longer able to deal with the phenomenon of healing. Over the past four decades, the dissatisfaction with the mechanistic approach to health and healthcare has grown rapidly both among healthcare professionals and the general public. The growing awareness of the power and the responsibility of individuals to maintain themselves in good health has expressed itself in increased attention to health nutrition, exercise, yoga and other “mind-body” practices.“ ("Systems View of Life: A Unifying Vision" (page 34) by Pier Luigi Liusi & Fritjof Capra)

You might have already gotten the sense of this from my earlier posts, but I am interest with systems thinking. It started in 2018 when I was introduced to word embeddings (which is now the fundamental unit of most LLMs). Word embeddings are representations of words in a high-dimensional space. The real magic isn't the precise position of each word, but rather, it's relative position to other words. The actual meaning of the word is unimportant compared to it's relationship and context to others.

Soon after word embeddings, almost serendipitiously, I learned about neural manifolds. In neuroscience, recordings from a population of neurons can sometimes seem like a chaotic mess. No two neurons respond identically within an individual, or even across trials of the same experiment. Simply, single-neuron activity is highly heterogenous. Yet, somehow, these noisy, chaotic, single neurons contribute to a consistent and *predictable* behaviour. Neural manifolds are the stable representations (in a lower-dimensional subspace) of populations of neurons that independently don't seem to be encoding very much information at all. Neural manifolds conveyed the idea (to me at least) that the complexities of the world, do not need to be over-simplfied to be understood; that there is a balance (a subspace where a complex world can be interpretted).

If you met me in early 2019, you would often see me with a stack of papers. 90% of these papers were about phenomenology and embodied cognition. The concept of the embodied mind is that human reason is shaped crucially by the nature of our bodies and brains and by our bodily experience.
>"Language was originally embodied in gesture and evolved from gesture together with human consciousness" (Roger Fouts, 1997).

>"Our brains take their input from the rest of our bodies. What are bodies are like and how they function in the world thus structures the very concepts we can use to think. We cannot think of just anything - only what our embodied brains permit" - George Lakoff

Our brains in our bodies in specific environmental contexts afford specific behaviours. This idea was codified (to me) when Dr Leah Krubitzer showed the motor cortical phenotype of rats raised in a lab was different than when in a natural environment. Although it raised some doubt in how much of controlled science is representative of nature, it only added to the overwhelming evidence that a reductionist way of thinking was not only meaningless but potential harmful.

Together, all these ideas 